If somebody's selling you something and
they say you've got autoimmune disease
or heart disease or cancer or you're
feeling depressed, maybe you need more
of this thing that costs $100. Isn't
this the same as the dude that sells
elixirs and tonic from the back of the
wagon? The snake oil. Yeah. What about
fluoride in the water? These types of
broader public health initiatives, if
you take them away, it's not going to
harm everyone equally, assuming there is
a benefit. During co we really saw kind
of a bit of a disaster around our social
contract that people leaned into what
they would call freedom but it's really
a version of selfishness. I'm sorry to
say it's a tough word. Okay. So there's
been a failure on the civics front and
an individual front. Did we remember
that there's a thing called the social
contract? So anecdotes being presented
in place of evidence is an immediate red
flag. And there's a saying the plural of
anecdotes is not data. Nice. I need that
on a t-shirt.
[Music]
This is Star Talk special edition. And
when it's special edition, you know
we've got Gary O'Reilly. Gary. Hi, Neil.
Chuck Knife. How you doing, man? Hey,
what's happening guys? Can't do a show
without you. Oh, man. That's very nice.
Oh, do we do sometimes? I was going to
say I was about to say even it's very
nice even though that's not true.
So, today we're talking about medical
misinformation. I don't believe you of
Hey, they started early
medical misinformation. Gary, take me
into this. Where we What do we got? All
right. Well, we live in a datadriven
world and we actually always have,
haven't we? Better information makes for
better decisions. So, why would you want
to purposefully create
disinformation? We are talking about
spreading medical disinformation that
can threaten people's lives potentially.
How can we tell the difference between
fact and fiction? What does the actual
science say? It's expert time. Um, yeah,
and for that we went to a Tik
Tocker/Youtuber who is on the front line
where this battle is taking place. Plus,
Neil, we're going to sit you down with
an Academy nominated filmmaker
responsible for the vaccine documentary,
A Shot in the Arm, and that would be
Scott Hamilton Kennedy. Coming up in
this very Yes. podcast. Yes. So, I have
in my office here at the Hayden
Planetarium of the American Museum of
Natural History in New York City, who
flew in from Boston for this interview,
Dr. Knock. Dr. Be. Thanks for the
invitation. Dude, this is a cleancut guy
as you've ever seen. I I have to tell
you, you are the whitest dude I You
should see me dance. I'm just saying.
I appreciate it, though. I I really do.
You have a PhD. You're an academic
medical medical professional. We can
call it that. That's right. Uh in
pharmarmacology. Yeah. Pharmaceutical
sciences. Pharmaceutical sciences. Drug
development. The immunology of drugs.
Oh, cool, man. Okay. And these are drugs
invented by lab scientists to achieve
some effect in our physiology. And that
is your expertise? Yes. Yes. Excellent.
And you're definitely a social media
influencer. And there's a word I just
learned today. You got medfluencer. Med
influencer for better or for worse.
Medfluencer. I got like a medical
influencer. Medfluencer. Yeah, that's
what I'm trying to say. I got you. I was
No, listen. I was trying to get clear on
the word sucks. Let me just Yeah. Okay.
No. Well, no. I We'll get used to it.
That's about words. You get used to
them. And so, you've taken it upon
yourself to try to correct the internet
with all of its misguided ways regarding
medical doses, medical choices. Perhaps
a misguided mission, but yeah, that's
the goal. That's not No, that's a great
mission. I mean, you know, yeah, the
internet is a cesspool of misinformation
and disinformation. So, and what makes
you think you could I mean, who you say,
let me take on the whole internet,
right? And a whole system. Yeah. Are you
the guy that um in that meme where he's
like brushing back waves with a with
a You ever see that? The guy with a push
broom. He's on the beach trying to brush
back the ocean. Yeah. That's what it
feels like.
So, you've been on the internet for now
seven six or seven years. When did the
internet become such a a safe place for
misinformation? It's a good question.
So, I think there's been the transition
obviously from print to radio to
television to now social media. I think
it was that last gap which is really
democratized. Anybody can sit down in
their car and make a piece of content
because you you can't sit down in your
car and make a TV show. No. Right.
Right. There's these editorial layers,
filters there, right? Which uh you know
is a bad thing because not everybody
could get their thoughts out there. But
now, of course, the downside is that
everyone can do the same for positive
information and false information.
Right. Right. So the so the tightest way
to say what you just said was uh it was
a problem that not everyone could get
their information out when it was
limited to TV. And now everyone can get
their information. They can get their
information out. Yeah.
And so there's been this big shift and
of course it's now entertainment, the
medical information on Tik Tok and
Instagram. You're competing with people
who are dancing and cats and dogs and
everything. And so you may be presenting
this very nuanced argument about
something, but you're constrained. You
have to make it entertaining or no one's
ever going to see it. So the truth is
boring. The truth is boring and nuanced
uh and takes a long time to say.
Amazing, isn't it? where where you can
you can find an environment where the
truth is exactly what you need it to be
yet some people have turned their back
on it because doesn't have a cat or it's
not entertaining. Oh, absolutely. I
mean, I find that in all the work that I
do with climate, he he's got a second
life where he's a climate advocate. Yes.
Yes. And it's so hard to have like very
succinct entertaining messaging because
the other side has stuff like drill baby
drill. Yeah. And we don't slogans,
right? Slogans. And slogans are great.
That's why you see them on bumper
stickers because they work, you know,
but make a sustainable economy through
renewable energy baby doesn't work. It
just doesn't, baby. Yeah. Right. Sounds
like you've tried though.
and
failed. So, we've got here what might
also be uh echo chambers where people
hear what they want or they look for
information to they look for their
understanding of information to be
affirmed and you do a Google search and
you'll find it. You'll find there's
seven other people who think exactly the
way you do and there's a false
affirmation.
So, how do you sort that out for people?
Yeah. So I mean that confirmation bias
is really confirmation bias really
really hard to escape and unless you're
very thoughtful about doing so you won't
escape it. You have to be intentional
and being intentional of course takes a
lot of mental energy which you may not
have. If you pull up Instagram usually
you're not looking to change your
opinion on something. You're looking to
spend five minutes while you're waiting
for you know a train or something. So
really takes a very intentional effort
to get out of this type of bubble. Yeah.
Do the algorithms still push things
towards people even though like your
confirmation bias is wrong. Does it
still say let me go get more of this
information because that just makes it
even worse for you then. Yeah. So the
algor the way I think of algorithms is
really of people's attention like what
is holding people's attention and so
inescapably platforms seek to optimize
how long are people going to stay on our
platform and see more ads. the business
model. It is and it works extremely well
and it's good for the consumer because
you are interested and you're
entertained while you're watching it.
But the dark side is sometimes the
things that hold your attention the most
are not what you would intellectually
choose if you tick off on a paper ahead
of time. I want to watch videos about
this. You find yourself slipping into
like rage batty content, things that are
arousing these negative emotions. Yeah.
Yes. Yes. And you know what's funny
about that? I Okay, I'm embarrassed to
say this. I just found out, I think it
was our producer, Alex, who taught me,
you can just go up and put not
interested and and and it says, "Okay,
we won't show you any more of this."
Which I did not know. I didn't know that
either. Yeah. And then all my There's a
whole lot of crap showing up on my line.
I'm ready to And I'm like And so I'm
like, "Am I an angry guy? Every video is
somebody beating the crap out of
somebody." Yeah. What is going on? Like
why is this happening? It's your inner
self. It is my inner self. I guess I
think there's truth to that. You can
learn a lot about somebody just by
looking at 10 videos on their feed or
something. Probably it's one of the
deepest ways to, you know, that's scary.
Yeah, it is. It is. Yeah. But now I now
I just hit not interested because
although here's the problem. The reason
I hit not interested is cuz I was
watching it. This stuff would come
across and I'd be like, "Oh my god, is
it Tuesday?" I just spent the whole day
watching people get the crap beat out of
them and I didn't want to. And this is a
topic of research. If you ask people, do
you want to see negative content and
emotional content? They'll tell you no.
But if then you track what happens when
they're it comes across their feed, they
stick through. It's like a car crash,
you know, like they everyone turns to
look their head at the last second. You
can't almost can't escape watching this
content. Even if intellectually you
think it's not good for me. So, as an
influencer, you need to be sensitized to
that so you know how to navigate it for
what you create and what you and what
your expectations are, right, for the
audience. So, Gary, why don't you give
us a laundry list here? All right.
before we do because you're fighting
this disinformation. You can't just go
on to your platform and say, you know,
don't watch that, don't listen, you're
dumb. No, you just there's because this
is immediately causing a problem. So,
what are your strategies to actually get
across and and make this information
more acceptable to people who wouldn't
necessarily want to know? Let me ask
that better, of course.
[Laughter]
in English. Why should anyone listen to
your ass instead of anybody else if
you're both talking medicine online?
Yeah. So, there is this tension of who
are you trying to talk to? Is it people
who already agree with you in which case
you may sort of go for sensationalized
approaches to a topic or is it people in
the middle who are undecided in which
case you may take a more nuanced
approach to discussion. If you want to
change minds, you have to do number two.
The problem with doing number two is
it's inherently less interesting than
speaking to people who already agree
with. It's less It's not as good
clickbait. It's not. So, you have to
figure out strategies in the first half
a second, 5 seconds to kind of make it
entertaining whether it's and I've done
some pretty embarrassing videos where
the whole theme of the video is POV
point of view. We're dancing at a party
and I'm like dancing on screen while I'm
exploring some medical topic. And the
only reason I'm doing these bad dance
moves on screen is to keep it
entertaining while I'm discussing.
Clear. They're bad dance moves, not
badass dance moves. Well, just to be
clear, it depends on the video.
But there has to be something to get
people watching. Mhm. All right. So, so
there's some there's some common medical
topics that people have strong opinions
about and have chosen their expert who
feeds them this information. So, you
compile the list. All right. Let's let's
let's start off with the one that's
obviously popular. Is there a cure for
cancer that they are keeping secret?
It's always they. The they. They. Yeah.
They they being the pharmaceutical
companies and the government researchers
and the university researchers
collectively, tens of thousands,
hundreds of thousands of people. Cuz you
know, it's easier to make money off of
the treatment than it is the cure. Yeah.
And I'm like, clearly you know nothing
about pharmaceutical companies. Cuz let
me tell you something. If they had a
cure for cancer, it'd be like, yes, we
have the cure. it is $1 million per pill
and that happens. That's part of the an
there's there's a few ways to answer
this question. One is the biology of the
cancer itself. One is from the
pharmaceutical company's perspective and
one is from social media perspective.
But certainly like you're saying there
are cures for some cancers, right? You
can't consider all cancer one thing.
It's hundreds of different diseases.
There will never be a treatment for all
cancers. But we have right now some
really really good treatments for
cancers where 50 years ago 70 years ago
survival rates were basically 0%. The
most common pediatric cancer acute
lymphablastic leukemia allliterally from
0% in the 1950s. Today something like
90% success rates with treatments. Wow.
And in the 10% of patients who don't
respond well initially there are backup
treatments like CARTT cell therapies
which happen to cost hundreds of
thousands of dollars but are super
effective. Yeah. Yeah. And so the point
is, you know, over time research does
develop treatments for specific cancers.
When they work really well, you can
charge lots of money. And you can bet
that if pharmaceutical companies could
sell that treatment for all cancers and
multiply their market size by 30fold,
they would be jumping at the opportunity
to do so, right? So where's the ethical
compass for a pharmaceutical company on
the pricing? Yes. Yeah. I believe it's
the twisting of the mustache.
That's how the compass works.
Yeah. So in that example of right or the
biting of the pinky,
you check the bank account balance and
notify the shareholders. Right. So part
of it is there's this limited period of
patent exclusivity where you make as
much money as you can to try to justify
all of your R&D that you've done up
until that point and then you get
generics which are much cheaper. So
cislatin first testicular cancer
metastic testicular cancer used to be
super low survival rate then researchers
discovered cislatin this drug you've
reduced mortality by something like
twothirds I think since the 1970s wow
it's generic now I think the cost of a
vial I don't know exactly it's like tens
of dollars hundreds of dollars so you
get this initial period where you can
make a lot of money off of a new drug
right and then everybody else gets to
compete with you in that drug you see
the how much time is it uh I can't
remember the exact number maybe 10
years, 15 years. It differs for chemical
drugs or biologic drugs. But wait,
biology is just a extreme expression of
chemistry. Yeah. So, how do you
distinguishing chemical drugs from
biological drugs? So, chemical drugs
being like small molecule maybe a better
example biologics like antibbody drugs.
Um, where it's this protein that's been
synthesized by cells. Dr. Vaccines would
come under that category. Vaccines I
think are biologics. Yeah, that's what
I'm saying. Yeah. But you see stuff like
metastatic melanoma used to have a
median survival time. And when I say
used to, I'm talking about the 2000s,
like 2010, median survival time of six
to nine months. This is skin cancer.
Skin cancer that has spread to your
lymph nodes and maybe other places in
the body. Horrible prognosis until
people developed what is currently a
very expensive treatment. Melanin
and the reason it's expensive is cuz
it's hard as hell to be black.
Tell me I'm lying. Well, a warning for
sun suninduced skin cancer. Yeah. Okay.
So you can't totally discount risk of
skin cancer. Of course. Right. So just
to be precise, the evidence that I know
says that white people are 25 times more
likely to contract skin cancer than
black people. All because of the
melanin. But the risk not zero. No. Bob
Marley died of skin cancer. Yeah. He was
light-skinned though. No, stop. No. No.
It was on the bottom of his foot. It
wasn't sun induced. Wow. It wasn't sun
induced. It was just Yeah. Yeah. back to
your your Yes. Anyway, the cure for that
metastatic melanoma 2010 median survival
time 6 to9 months. Wow. Today it's I
think it's almost 10 years. Wow. And so
the difference is that people have been
doing all this basic and translational
research. Now we have drugs called
checkpoint inhibitors that modify your
immune system. So your immune system can
now go attack the cancer better. Right.
And they're very expensive. Yeah.
Hundreds of thousands of dollars. Yeah.
They're currently on patent. I think
most of them are on patent. They're
going to become generic. They will
become less expensive, but I can tell
you the companies that make them right
now would love to sell them for every
cancer out there if they had data
showing it worked for every cancer out
there. Also, you get to re-up the patent
for the different uses. So, if like if
you can modify the drug in any way to
treat something else, that's a brand new
patent. There's a downstream effect of
these drugs to find out they've got
other applications. Exactly. So it has
to be a meaningful you can't just tinker
with it and try to be cute and then say
we got a new patent because what people
will do is say well that's not a
meaningful difference. We're still just
going to use the generic of your first
drug. It works just as well. So you
really do have to make you really got to
make a it has to be a true alteration.
Right. Ah okay that makes sense. Does
big farmer suppress natural remedies
because they aren't profitable? Which
kind of touches on what we've just been
discussing. Yeah. I shouldn't say yeah.
I should say no. That's the start to
that question. There's actually a huge
number of drugs that have natural
origins. And I'll think of a few
examples. Aspirin is a good example from
I think willow bark for thousands of
years. People took it and turned it into
salves or ointments or whatever it was
for the same properties. A chemist
figured out. I forget what year, but you
know, this is the active compound in
willow bark that's having these effects.
If we modify it a little bit, it reduces
the gastrointestinal side effects. We
sell that now as aspirin. And clearly
aspirin is not very expensive. No. yet.
Or should that be the buffered aspirin
that protects your stomach lining? Uh,
right. Cettoic acid. Yes. Versus
salicin. I'm not a chemist. Okay. Okay.
Um, sound like one.
But go ahead. But basically, and that's
one example. I think like I forget the
number 30 40% of all drugs FDA approved
drugs do have a natural origin either
directly from nature or it's been
modified a little bit and then used as a
and how much of that was studied from
indigenous cultures that had long
traditions some of healing was like if
there's the story of people have used
this plant for hundreds or thousands of
years researchers take it isolate all
the compounds put it in this huge panel
against a cancer target for example and
you get a psychedelic
those were found every every culture has
found that without doubt in the plants.
So, the misconception I think is if it
looks like a pill, it's not natural. But
it's very possible that the molecules in
there came from the bark of some tree.
Absolutely. I I I I hate when I hear
people say, "Oh, it's not a natural
remedy." And I'm like, "Here's the
thing. Everything that's happening in
your body is happening on a molecular
basis." So, these people have found a
way to figure out a way to isolate the
molecular compounds, and it's the same
thing. So now you don't have to eat a
bushel full of weeds. You can just take
a pill, dummy. It's called progress.
Anyway, sorry. Okay, so progressing. Are
raw diets, i.e. raw milk, raw meat,
healthier because they're more natural.
And then we've got a caveat here. What
about pink Himalayan sea salt versus
regular table salt? Great. Both very
closely related. The answer is no. Watch
where you step there. I have Himalayan
salt and I spent a lot of money on it.
People will claim, you know, the pink
salt has 400% more of this mineral
compared to regular table salt. If
neither of them in the first place were
supplying a a meaningful amount of that
nutrient or mineral to your health,
right? It's not a difference. And so the
risk is actually if you think what
you're saying is 400 times a small
number is still a small number. Exactly.
Right. It's 1% versus 4% of your daily
intake and you're getting more from
eating a mango or whatever it might be
otherwise. And so the risk is if people
think pink Himalayan sea salt is healthy
for me, now you're using more of it on
your food. And the real health impact is
second order. It's now you're eating
3,000 milligrams of salt per day instead
of 1500 because you think it's giving
you these health effects, right? And
then you'd have risk for hypertension or
whatever. And the number one contributor
to hypertension is salt intake. So I
mean aside from heredity, like you know,
so first is yeah, all that kind of but
first is being black. Then, let's be
honest, okay, let's you black, you gonna
get high blood pressure. Uh, but then
it's your lifestyle and then sodium
intake, you know. Yeah. And the raw milk
is similar. Um, there's no meaningful
benefits to consuming raw milk or raw
meat compared to the pasteurized
version. And so, people will blow this
weight up proportion. I think this is
where people get tribalized on social
media. You have people who very
passionately only drink raw milk or who
otherwise say if you do drink raw milk
you're going to die or something. Oh, so
that's the polarization of that
decision. Exactly. And so people's lived
experiences are well I drink raw milk
all the time and so do my friends and
none of us have died. What are you
talking about? Right. And realistically,
you know, maybe hundreds or a couple
thousand people may be hospitalized per
year from doing it. It's not a big risk,
but it's an unnecessary risk because
there's no benefit from drinking raw
milk compared to pasturized. But the
people who say there is a benefit, what
reasons are they giving? Yeah. And what
and what what are the supposed benefits?
Cuz this is this got really big a couple
of months ago. It got huge. It was a
movement. And it's because of this polar
people like identify as raw milk as an
anti-establishment statement almost. And
there are proposed things like it's got
these undenatured proteins or enzymes or
live bacteria in it. Okay. Which
mechanistically we think will help your
health. I haven't seen any evidence to
support any of those actual benefits as
being truly beneficial. But somebody
came up with it. Yeah, they did to
assume that it's true. Right. And I know
who that guy was.
Okay, moving on. But are GMO foods bad
for your health?
For your health, no. I have no concern
eating a genetically modified food. M
the fact that there's a modified gene in
there or leading to a modified protein,
you digest it just like any other
protein or DNA in all the food that we
eat. There is though sort of a second
level of effect. It's not bad from you
eating the modified corn or whatever,
right? And I'm not an expert on this
part, but what are the environmental
impacts of now having this monoculture
and having companies being in control of
the seeds that are used to make that
particular product uh or different
pesticide use that are specific for
those modified things? Those are all
separate questions from if I eat this
modified soy or corn, is it going to
directly harm my health? To that part,
the answer is very clearly no. Right?
So, what you're saying is that there are
separate arguments that you can make
against GMOs, but not the one that talks
about whether or not it's harmful to you
physiologically. Right. Right. And
there's quite a lot of, you know,
decades of research from very large
populations showing there's not health
risks from eating the modified version
of this. And by the way, aren't isn't
most aren't most crops monocrops? Yeah.
I mean, whether or not it's GMO, I mean,
isn't I don't know the answer to that. I
know for like corn and soy and stuff, I
think like 90% plus are GMO, right?
Okay. So, if you're eating any cornbased
product, um, and maybe there's something
to be said there. If the process of GMO
makes corn more available in our diet
and that meaningfully shifts the overall
food profile that we're eating, maybe
that shift has an impact on our dietary
intake overall as a culture. True. has
nothing to do with the corn itself
versus an unmodified corn, right? And by
the way, I don't know if you've ever
seen heirloom corn, but screw that crap.
Okay. Like the corn that's modified is
juicy and delicious. Yeah. Sweet and
everything. Like not this pink and
purple and blue shriveled up little
thing that you know they call corn.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So,
I think there's very little food sold in
a supermarket that
matches its ungenetically modified
ancestor ancestor right absolutely so
all of them so so if it's not laboratory
GMO it'd be farmer farmer GMO right
because at some point selected over
centuries yeah and I don't have people
say they should label the food if it's
GMO and while that's surely not
necessary if you did do that I would say
label it so GMO and then have one branch
say and is it scientist GMO or is it
farmer GMO right and then every food
item in the would be GMO would be GMO of
some kind anytime you make a hybrid or
crossbreed or do anything like that.
You're genetically modifying the plant.
So, it's carrots, isn't it? Carrots
originally were purple. Yeah. And by the
way, I love purple carrots. Yeah. There
you go. Right. Moving on. Um, what about
fluoride in the water? These types of
broader public health initiatives, if
you take them away, it's not going to
harm everyone equally, assuming there is
a benefit. Interesting. Who's it going
to most deeply impact? The people who
have least access to dental care, who
have least access to fluoridated
toothpaste and regular toothbrushing,
right? There's a large chunk of society
who possibly wouldn't see as much of a
big health impact compared to another
section of society who may see massive
disproportion dialogue that's never
discussed. Nobody ever talks about it.
Right. Right. Yeah. And certainly if you
happen to be in a very privileged
stance, you can't decide just based on
yourself for very broad public health
met. You shouldn't. You certainly can
and people often do. Yeah. Following up
on your sort of comment and clever was,
what are some of the red flags that
content might be misinformed? What what
gets your ears pricricked up and go,
"Oh, hello." Good stuff. It's a lot.
It's a strong overlap with the type of
content that is very intriguing to
watch. And so, you'll see anecdotes
being presented. I have three friends
who had very latest stage cancer, right?
They took XYZ medications and now none
of them have cancer. Mhm.
Hydroxychloricquin. Okay. Yeah, I wasn't
going to name medications. This isn't a
different
podcast that is frequently done. So,
anecdotes being presented in place of
evidence is an immediate red flag. But
it's also really, but they think it's
evidence. They think it's evidence when
they present an and there's a saying,
the plural of anecdotes is not data.
Nice. I need that on a t-shirt.
Yes. But only scientists have even even
their slogans are boring.
The plural of anecdotes is not data,
which is beautiful to say. I wish most
people got it, though. Yeah. And it's
it's not a replacement for a controlled
clinical study where you're monitoring
all these different variables that
otherwise can easily confound whatever
you're looking at. Right. What I what I
tell people when they say, "Oh, I have
an aunt who took this herbal cure for
cancer and she's doing just fine right
now." And I say, "The nine people who
took that cure and are now dead are not
being interviewed by anybody." No.
How how much of what gets put out on
social media has behind it a conflict of
interest? That's a major red flag. So,
if you see somebody telling you, "Oh,
this autoimmune disease and this cancer
and this heart disease are all due to a
deficiency in these three vitamins,
which if you go to the link in my bio, I
happen to be selling in a in a vial for
$90 per month." Can you really trust
that these very broad statements? First
of all, making broad statements like
that, there's a reason why people see
individual nutritionists and dietitians
and doctors. It's because you can't give
prescriptive advice like if you take
more vitamin D, you can solve your
autoimmune disease. That's simply not
true. But if you're selling a vitamin D
capsule, you're very motivated to make
that type of statement. Okay, so that's
that's another red flag there. However,
just because they're selling it to you
doesn't mean it doesn't work. Correct?
So, this would only mean you just want
to be a little more cautious, right?
Right. But it's not an immediate
disqualifying event. Exactly. So, I
would start from a place of skepticism
to start. And then if you see, oh,
there's conflict of interest and they're
presenting only anecdotes and they're
being sensationalized and exaggerating
and they're claiming that this one
particular treatment is helping with
five different diseases and they're
really charismatic and they're really
charismatic, uh, then your guardrail
should be almost at the roof. Wow. Okay.
So, that's the the universal cure all
tablet, potion, lotion. Yeah. If
somebody's selling you something and
they say you've got autoimmune disease
or heart disease or cancer or you're
feeling depressed, maybe you need more
of this thing that costs $100. Isn't
this the same as the dude that sells
elixirs and the tonic? The the tonic
from the back of the wagon, the snake
oil. Snake oil. Yeah, exactly. Is that
the same thing but on the internet
today? Working in the same principles to
the same audience. Same. We're all still
human and vulnerable to those
susceptible humans. Yeah. And that's
exactly it. Because when you're feeling
vulnerable, when you're feeling like,
I've been to the doctor, they told me
they don't know exactly what's going on,
but this person says maybe they do, and
they've got this thing they can sell me.
Maybe it'll work in a if you weren't
feeling vulnerable in that moment, you
might easily identify that as, oh,
they're just grifting. They're trying to
make a buck. So, they're looking for the
the desperate, the the last refuge or
the desperate find them. Yes. Mhm.
Right. All right. The other one here,
false dichotoies and polarized thinking.
Yeah. So these is another example of
things that perform super well on social
media. If you say if you don't eat a
totally plant-based or a totally
carnivore diet, you're at risk for all
these different diseases. The reality is
in between. Like obviously if you eat
more whole plant-based foods and
vegetables and nuts and legumes and
whole grains that's better for your
health, but it's not like you can't
occasionally have some non-plant-based
foods. It's a it's a spectrum. But the
type of content that's always going to
perform really well is where you make
these really big, bold, sensational
claims that aren't necessarily
reflective of the scientific reality.
How is one to know that is the evidence
that they're making a an extraordinary
claim? Yeah, that's the evidence. That's
that's one of these things where if
that's ticking a box on the content,
they're making this super exaggerated
claim. Wow. So, this should be like a
toolkit, like a checklist and a
checklist you send around. Do we believe
that the medical misinformation is known
to be misinformation by the people
pedalling it or do they actually think
it's real? Because if they think it's
real, then someone else has to know it's
misinformation and not the person who's
delivering but it becomes misinformation
and then if they know that it's false
and they still share it, then it becomes
disinformation. Okay. I think there's
both. I think a lot of the time people
do genuinely believe the things they're
saying. Even if they're selling the
product to fix this deficiency or
whatever, they're not doing it.
Sometimes they may be, but they're not
always doing it knowingly deceiving you.
A lot of the time I think people do
believe the things that they're
pedalling. And that that boosts their
sincerity on camera. Right. Right. And I
don't think you can do it otherwise. You
can't sit in front of a camera and lie
to people for years knowingly just
extracting money from them. Some people
can. Most people I don't think could.
Well, I think what people do
psychologically is convince themselves.
So, they lie to themselves first until
they believe their own lie because that
can happen and then they're able to
promulgate that lie convincingly because
they actually believe it. Yeah. And this
up until recently, I wasn't sure if some
of the biggest sort of peddlers of
disinformation and questionable
supplements really believe what they
were talking about. I watched this crazy
video about Joe Marcola, um, one of the
largest sort of supplement salesmen and
pushers of misinformation. Investigative
reporting showing he consults with what
he believes is an entity from the causal
plane. He gets on Zoom sessions with
this sort of seer person who is relaying
messages from this other plane of
existence. It astonishing to show that,
you know, he truly believes that this
person is channeling this other entity
and guiding his business practice and
the types of information he's going to
be one of the top 10 suppliers like
medical institutions in the world.
Stunning to see the videos of these Zoom
sessions and realize he's not making
this up from his mansion just to try to
sell people more supplements.
There's something deeper going on here,
right? Disinformation, misinformation is
one thing. When you angle it and you
bring it in an anti-science way, this
can't just be we don't like science,
let's move on. There must be strategies.
There must be ways which this messaging
is being pushed and delivered. And by
the way, it's it's not only
anti-science, it's also, well, I don't
trust scientists. You know, you have the
urge to say, well, trust me, I'm an
expert. But then anyone can say that,
and so why should I trust you and not
someone else, right? or someone with the
exact same credentials, right? PhDs,
doctors all the time make statements
that are totally incorrect. And many of
them have the pedigree of what school
they attended or they were awarded in.
And so, yeah, I I think that your
comment about trust is a huge one. If
most people think about the FDA or the
NIH or the CDC, there's probably not a
face that comes to mind. That's the
oppos at all. Maybe one person, but even
if there is one person, they don't know
what that person is like in their free
time. They don't know what if they have
a family or what they enjoy. That's the
opposite of what happens on social
media. You develop these deep like
personal relationships almost with
people that you see whether they're
pushing misinformation or evidence-based
information. And I think it takes that
human connection to actually build up
trust in whatever someone is saying.
Mhm. Wait. So you're saying that the
people who are pedling misinformation
are developing a relationship with their
viewer where the viewer trusts them.
Absolutely. Yeah. Okay. So how's the
trust going in your Tik Tok channel?
Yeah. So aside from medical information
videos guy you get a lot of haters who
are just like you're so full of you know
sometimes there's working for the big
pharma I get some be haters haters
haters going to hate it happens you know
with a big enough viewership you get all
manner of comments and but part of it is
not just making like I'm going to tell
you about ibuprofen today some you know
I make videos with my dog or I'll do a
little silly dancing video or a trend or
something just to show that you are a
real person. You're not just paritting
data from a research paper with a with a
lab coat. Yeah. Yeah. In fact, the most
memorable DM I've ever received, this is
back in 2021. Everyone had questions
about the COVID vaccine. So, I was
talking about that for 99% of live
stream. I come to the very end of it and
I say, "I've got to go. My wife is
almost home from the hospital. I've got
to go cook her dinner." And then I end
the live stream. Cool. And then all the
comments were about that. The message I
got afterwards was, "I didn't know if I
believed you about the CO vaccines. I
don't know if I can trust you. I don't
know if I can trust science until you
said the reason you were leaving was to
go cook dinner for your wife and I
realized like you're just a normal
person. Right. Right. So, what is the
best strategy for viewers who want to
know rather than absorb information from
someone who is very entertaining and
very personable but may not be the right
source. Where do they go? Is it do your
own research? Have you done the
research? Neil's talked about it. You've
got this confirmation bias. How do you
sort of navigate through that for
getting the right right information?
Right. Especially since you have a PhD.
How many years did it take for your PhD?
Four and a half. So four nearly five
years focusing on that one topic. Right.
Right. Years, journals, papers
published. And there are people who
spend a half hour in an afternoon
saying, "I did the research. I did the
research." Yeah. Which could be
listening to a podcast. Right. Could be
watching a YouTube video. And so the
short answer is realistically I think
most people can't do their own research
in the way that I would interpret doing
one's own research on a topic. And so
what you're in fact half of graduate
school is learning how to be a graduate
student, right? It's really it's complex
not just to find the relevant research
papers, but to critically interpret
their study design and the results in
the context of the broader literature.
You're talking hundreds of hours of just
time spent reading in a given topic
area. No one's going to do that.
Certainly not after watching an
Instagram video and then questioning, is
this medically accurate? And so what
you're left with, unfortunately, is you
do have to identify people or
institutions that you trust. I was going
to say trusted sources is is really the
key. You're never going to go do all of
the research required on every given
medical topic or topic, you know, in
general in your life. So, do the
institutions need to do more to make
this accessible in the face of the fact
that science seems to have been
weaponized and turned against itself?
Yeah, I think there's a critical
shortcoming in that. If people were to
tune in to the 4-hour discussion section
where the CDC talks about the benefits
and risks of this vaccine or this
intervention, you would very quickly
realize these people are taking a very
rigorous approach to both the medical
risks and the benefits. I trust them to
come up with the right answer. You never
see any of that even though it's
technically publicly available because
all of the focus, most of the focus is
not on communicating those sort of inner
details of how these decisions are made.
it ends up being this is the decision or
the recommendation or the recommendation
for good reason perhaps because then
doctors can take that and make that
recommendation known but I think things
have shifted even just in since co I
think we would really benefit from
personalization of these big
institutions in a way that people feel
they know people at them okay I'm old
enough to remember this would be mid80s
now early 80s where the surgeon general
Cfford Coupe came out and said you got
to wear condoms
prevent the spread of AIDS. And I don't
think anyone had publicly said the word
condom before, right? Uh especially not
a public official. And people trusted
him. Plus, he had his little sex
education in school and that was about
it. Yeah. And plus he had a certain
grandpa element to him. He was a face of
the nation's medicine, right? And Fouchi
maybe was that but not really. So is
that the solution here? I think I think
that's a big part of it is really
humanizing the process of how do we come
to these recommendations in the first
place and then do we trust your
recommendation because we know the
process you've gone through. People are
never going to sit down and do 300 hours
worth of research on a topic. As someone
with a PhD in pharmarmacology and I will
mention immunology, explain the actual
science of how vaccines work and how the
body then goes to create the necessary
antibodies. It's actually the same
process as when you're infected with a
virus, right? And so it's the same
answer for both. I'll answer from a
vaccine standpoint. You get the
injection in your arm, right? What have
you just injected? Most often little
pieces of the pathogen. So what happens
in your arm tissue, pretty much nothing
right there. You've got one big immune
cell that comes in and scoops it up. It
takes it to your draining lymph node is
what it's called. So it goes through
this whole separate pathway in your
body. You've got your blood circulatory
system. Most people don't know you
actually have a separate almost
circulation system called lymph
lymphatic system. So the white blood
cells travel from wherever you got the
injection. It carries it back to a lymph
node and it starts showing it to all
these other immune cells and it says do
you recognize this? No. Do you recognize
this? No. Until it finds one. Oh, it's
like a lineup. It is. And and the the
neat part is all of those cells that are
just sitting in your lymph node waiting
to be shown something they recognize.
They'll sit there like this. They
exactly like the guy for the car at the
airport. If they don't recognize it,
then what? Nothing happens. And then
they and the the one lymph node is just
like, "Take your time. It's okay."
Exactly. The immune cells getting tired
walking along.
But all of those cells were randomly
generated in advance. Right. So before
CO ever existed, you had in your body T-
cells and B cells that recognized COVID.
And then when you eventually got
infected for the first time or got your
vaccine, it was like their time to
shine. Basically, like, oh, hey, I know
that one. When that happens, that cell
gets activated. It multiplies,
multiplies, multiplies. It starts making
antibodies, right, that go back to your
site of infection. Go throughout your
whole body. It also activates TE-C
cells. So T- cells are the ones that
recognize, oh, that that friendly cell
is infected with a virus. I better kill
that cell. Have to kill that cell.
Right. Right. Exactly. So you get this
combination of antibodies that are
floating around to neutralize the virus
when it's in between cells and T-C cells
to kill the ones that are incubating
virus actively. And that same process
happens whether you've been infected
with a virus. it still takes the piece
of virus and goes to the lymph node and
activates the BNT cells. Here's
something I never understood. Uh there
are people who had pretty serious side
effects to the COVID vaccine. Uh if the
vaccine is doing what CO itself would
have done, does that mean they would
have had those same side effects had
they gotten CO straight up? I don't
think so. I don't know of data to say
one way or the other. If the severity of
your vaccine response is predictive,
know the data one way guys honest
honest but boring. That's
I can cope with that. No, I just want to
call out that when a scientist is
speaking and they're honest about their
work and then all people say I don't
know one way or another. That's honesty.
I'd rather that right? Yeah. You could
lie to us and be really confident and
then we do what you say. Yeah, man. If
you got a bad fever after the injection,
you would have died from CO.
Uh I don't know one way or the other. I
my suspicion is that there's probably
not much of a link between the two and
also that it would be very hard to test
because obviously once you are
vaccinated then when you get infected
it's going to be and by the way your
infection if you do get it it's going to
be lessened by the fact that you've been
vaccinated right which so yeah it's uh
it's like trying to get toothpaste back
in the tube. Yeah. Yeah. Not happening.
Let's talk about the less extreme
misunderstandings about vaccines
starting with can you have too many
vaccinations? Hm. The short answer is
no. There comes a point where if you
keep vaccinating against a certain
pathogen, you don't get additional
benefit. There's actually really big
results just published for HPV vaccines,
one dose versus two doses, the human
papilloma virus. That's right. The one
that causes cervical cancer. Going from
one dose to two doses is not that much
better than one dose. But very important
to know that, right? Critically, but but
that has to be trials have to reveal
that otherwise you wouldn't know. Yeah.
No, this is the result of decades of
clinical studies. Maybe to your question
though of in general like people talk
about oh my child's going to receive x
number of vaccines over y number of
years to that one the answer is
definitely no. If you consider the total
number of pathogens we're exposed to on
a daily basis. Think about your entire
gut. It's constantly being sampled for
bacteria and viruses and everything and
then your immune system is secretting
antibodies into your gut to regulate
your gut microbiome. An additional one
or 10 pathogens from a vaccine is a drop
in the bucket compared to compared to
everything that's happening inside your
body all the time. And by the way, I
cannot emphasize enough that the
comparison he gave is very common in
science. You can say, "Will this harm
me?" Right? And yeah, but look at the
all the other things you're doing and
you're not worried about that harming
you and those risks are 10 times as
high. Right. So it's not a harm. That's
very important comparison to make and
it's a statistical comparison that I
don't think people are comfortable or
have experience doing. Yeah. Well,
because the the way they intuit it is
intuition is f is is false. They intuit
it wrongly because they say well if I
took this vaccine and this vaccine and
this vaccine and this vaccine all at the
same time my body must not be able to
handle that and that is what is causing
this disease or this condition or what
but the truth is your body is responding
to it because it's responding to that
all the time. Yeah. And separately in
parallel, this goes back to the fact
there's all these cells sitting in your
lift node waiting for their target,
right? Just because you activate this
one, this other one is still available
just waiting for its target. You can
activate both at the same time. At the
same time, they're doing they're doing
different things. They're they're
fighting different things. It's not like
one is stepping on the other, right? You
know, they're both going it's like a
five alarm fire. One fire station is
called, then a second fire station is
called. They don't cancel each other
out. They help each other do their
thing. You know, one takes one part of
house, one takes another. So, yeah. All
right. Couple of other less extreme
misunderstandings to go through. Uh, can
you firstly overload the immune system
or can you boost the immune system? Oh,
great question. That's wow. You both
cannot boost your immune system in the
ways you're thinking of, nor do I think
it would be a good idea to boost your
immune system. You want balance your
immune system. Actually, if you get too
much immune activity, you know what? you
end up with autoimmune disease, right?
If you get too little immune activity in
your body, that increases your risk for
cancer, right? And so it's this balance
between having just enough immune
activity to respond to acute infections
and stuff, but even if you could boost
your immunity by taking some supplement,
I don't know that you would want to do
so, right? Um, there are certainly, it's
funny because when we start out in life,
that's the whole idea is not to keep
your child away. Just let them go, do
whatever because they're going to
encounter these pathogens naturally and
then they're going their body, their
immune system is going to develop
accordingly. Yeah, I should say there
are things you can do to reduce the
function of your immune system. So, you
don't want to be not getting enough
sleep, right? I should say it in the way
that you should do it. You should get
high quality high double negative the
thing. Yeah, confusing myself. So, get
proper sleep. Sleep, nutrition, physical
activity, right? Low stress over time.
These things are boring. They do
meaningfully impact your immune
response. If you sleep deprive someone
before giving them a vaccine, you can
measure differences in the tighters
they're going to develop like in the
days leading up to and after a vaccine.
But in the what that they're going to
develop, uh like the the antibbody
responses to that vaccine will be worse
if you've sleep deprived them for the
days leading up to it. Look at that. So,
the basic lifestyle stuff like is that
an experiment someone's conducted? It
is. Yeah.
Volunteered for that. Exactly. So if
you're doing those every year and I took
the vaccine. No. Got it. Yeah. If you're
doing sort of the basic lifestyle stuff
that you know already for every other
disease on the planet. Um that's
basically the extent of what you want to
do to be caring for your immune system.
It's also going to help you with
everything else. Before we go on and
bring on my next guest, why is it that
some vaccines need to be boosted later
on?
Whereas whereas others don't. Great
question. So So in other words, you can
be immune. You can be vaccinated for
life with one kind, but another one you
need you need a measles is like that. Is
that right? Yeah. If you got a measel
shot as a child back in the 60s, you're
probably going to need a booster right
now. There's two levels of variability
here. One is across different pathogens.
Mhm. Some pathogens are capsular and
it's harder to get longerlasting, you
know, antibbody responses against what
you need to get responses against. You
just need to get boosted. Those
infections, if you get them, maybe you
get infections more recurrently with
rhino viruses or different corona
viruses. It's not like you get infected
once in your life and then you never get
that pathogen again. Right. Over time,
maybe your immunity waines for whatever
reason. So there's differences across
pathogens just based on their structure.
Oh, there's also big differences. When
you say structure, you mean their
physical, how the molecules would ever
connect. Yeah. And how how that primes
your memory immune response to be either
longerlasting or not. Interesting. But
then there's also huge differences
across people in the variability of both
the potency of your immune response and
the duration that it lasts. Okay? And
you can't tell based on how you feel.
And so that there's two levels of
variability there. Over a population, it
works great. But at any given person for
any given pathogen, you could see hugely
different persisting antibbody levels 20
30 years after vaccination. I heard this
saying, no medicine is good for
anyone until it has been tested on
everyone. Wow. Yeah. So there's some
truth to that, right? Absolutely. So So
you can't test it on everyone because
you have sample sizes. But if you test
it on a thousand people and there's a
one in a million reaction that someone
might have to it, you won't know that in
that sample of a thousand, right? Which
is the whole value of doing post
marketing surveillance, uh, which is
done very surprisingly. Word
surveillance. Come on. Please best post
followup. Post marketing followup. Yes.
Where you've got these databases looking
out for signals of potential risk. And
if one pops up, you know, that's
probably anecdotal, but it serves as the
basis for a rigorous investigation that
you go do then afterwards. Got it. And
so tell me, and just to end it here,
tell me about the vaccine
adverse event reporting system. Adverse
effects reporting system. Theirs.
Theirs. Yeah. What is that? So it's
exactly that type of monitoring system
where we've tested these vaccines in
this number of people. It looks good in
that number of people. we're not going
to test it in 300 million people before
we release it. So you release it and
you're getting safety signals if the
same thing starts to pop up over time.
You say, "Well, we should go do a formal
study and look if that's actually
associated with the vaccine." Gives you
an excuse to focus in, right? For things
that could be very rare that you would
never see in a typical clin clinical
trial, even if you had 10,000 20,000
people in the clinical study because
it's one in a million or one in 10
million, right? And so there's some
noise because these things are
voluntarily reported and sometimes
things do happen by coincidence. That's
what the V stands for. Volunteer. Look
at that. No, no. V stands for vaccine.
Yeah. Vaccine adverse event reporting
system. So this relies entirely on
someone knowing it exists, logging on
and typing in some effect, right?
Adverse effect. It's often healthcare
providers who will log it. They'll say
the person got this vaccine. Oh, good.
So there's a professional in the loop.
Correct. Very good to know that. Um, but
just because it's in the system doesn't
mean it's necessarily related. It's a
starting point for investigation and
that's where it goes wrong. People will
say, "Look how many reports there were
in the system." But of course, what
happens if you vaccinate 30 million
children? Some of those children are
going to have other things happen to
them that are
unrelated that might be related or they
may not. There's the some rare other
thing that it's time coincident with and
there's not a cause and effect. Right.
And so it's critical to have to identify
when there are true signals. You can't
rely on it to show that vaccines are
dangerous for XYZ, right? Yes.
Interesting. Tell me if I'm wrong here.
When the COVID
vaccine arrived and it wasn't yet enough
for everybody, so they did first
responders and then teachers. I think
that roll out felt sensible to me.
All of us who remembered things like the
polio vaccine and the smallox vaccine
fully expected that once you got that
vaccine you would never get co again.
But that is not what happened.
And then well there's a new strain and
there's new this and then people got it
twice. Some people got the same strain
twice. So it seems to me that fact
undermines certain people's confidence.
Yeah. that that was either the right
vaccine or an appropriate vaccine or
whether people even knew what they were
talking about. We all know people who've
had COVID three four times. I I was no
vid until like 3 months ago I would say.
Yeah. So I think this is a misalignment
of expectations versus reality. We know
looking at other corona viruses because
there are seasonal corona viruses that
mostly now cause the common cold. People
get reinfected all the time. Yeah. And
so there's every reason to expect with a
new corona virus you have immunity now.
That doesn't totally preclude you from
infection later. Yeah. But if I had
small pox, I expect no small pox. Right.
And so there's huge variability across
different pathogens. Nobody told us that
when the vaccine came out. Exactly. So I
think that's the shortfalling of
communication. Did they know that that
was something they could have
communicated at the time or was it still
on the frontier of learning of the
progress of the novelty of the virus?
There's a big part of that too is being
honest and we don't know for sure yet.
This is a new virus right now if you get
the vaccine, you're not going to get
infected or it's a 95% reduction in
risk. Uh or your risk of severe disease
is reduced by 90%. But how that will
change 3 years from now, you can't be
totally certain. If they knew that, they
needed to be honest about it, I think.
Yeah. Because that's how science works.
You know what you know at any given time
and you give the best available
information. So, uh, we want everyone to
watch your postings. Dr. Knock. That's
right. Dr. Knock. That's right. Dr. And
that's on Tik Tok. And are you call that
also on Instagram? Tik Tok. Instagram.
Yep. Same name. Excellent. Rising
through three and a half million uh
viewers. That That should be 20 million
viewers, I think. Even more than that.
We need it. We need 330 million viewers.
That should come on. The whole country.
the country.
Thanks for coming down for this. Really
appreciate the invitation. Enjoyed the
discussion. Live into my office and it's
good to know you're in arms reach up
there in Boston. Brooklyn is your town.
That's right. That's right. Right across
the Charles River. Why don't you just
give the man's address?
Sorry. Now, I wear a disguise at all
times outside of the recording studio so
you'll never notice me. All right. When
we come back, Scott Hamilton Kennedy
will tell us about his film, his
documentary Shot in the
Arm on the subject of medical
misinformation. We can't call that topic
complete without venturing into the
world of vaccine
hesitancy, vaccines in general. And
there's one person who's at the front of
that conversation, and it's my friend
Scott Hamilton Kennedy. Scott, welcome
to Star Talk. Good to see you, Neil.
Hey, dude. You're a filmmaker. I am a
filmmaker. Storyteller. A documentary
filmmaker. Yeah. Storyteller. Because
not all documentaries tell stories. They
try. They're just informational. They
can be a little laundry listy. Yeah.
When you're laundry list, it it's less
compelling, I find. Agre. Agreed.
Because you know deeply, I'm guessing
that people love to have stories told to
them. And why? Yeah. What's the origin
of that? I would say you've all hari
said it so beautifully in his book
sapiens that he said that storytelling
is the best tool we have available to us
as human beings to get along to agree to
change things he really put it into such
an amazing context that it is the art of
storytelling that we can use to convince
each other to make this world a more
functioning place. So, you made a film
called Shot in the Arm, which I actually
had something to do with. You invited me
as a script consultant. Not that I am an
expert on vaccines, but that I do think
deeply about how people learn science
and what may convince them one way or
another. So, thank you for inviting me.
I would call you my mentor, sir, if I
can. Uh, so where did that film come
from in your head? Yeah. So, uh, I'll go
all the way back to 2018. I was talking
to a wonderful doctor uh Dr. John Were
viruses invented in 2018 yet
in 2018. Well, you know Dr. John
Schwarzber because we got to do another
film together called food evolution.
That was a reset of the conversation on
GMOs. And Dr. John Schwarzber runs the
Berkeley Wellness Letter, this fantastic
letter out of Cal Berkeley that has
doctors vet scientific information and
then bring it back to the public in a
consumable way, not consumer. When you
say doctors vet the scientific
information, it means they read the
journals and bring journal information.
That's right. To the people. That's
right. So the people don't have to read
the journals. That's right. They're
interpreted. It It's wonderful. It's
such a simple, beautiful and very much
of your world, too. Right. That you're a
wonderful translator in a way of
complicated science. And he said to me,
um, Scott, what's your next movie going
to be on? You should take on these
antivaxers. This is fall 2018. And in my
wisdom, I said, um, oh no, why would I
need to touch them? They're going to go
away. They're going to burn out. Genius
as always. Cut to spring 2019.
Record-breaking measles outbreak. A
state of emergency here in New York City
in the Orthodox Jewish community or
measles. Measles outbreak after it had
been declared defeated. We were on the
road to eliminating it in 2000. We were
World Health Organization. Did they make
these declarations? That's right. That's
my lazy research I did when this when I
saw the state of emergency in New York
City is I did a little research and I
saw that we're about to eliminate it
2000. So, what the heck is going on
here? Why would we have a state of
emergency if we're so close? And I
called Dr. Paul Offett, who's a big part
of the upsh shot in the arm. And he
said, "Scott, it's not very complicated,
but it is nefarious that there are
people out there that have become to be
known as antivaxers who scare and
convince parents to not vaccinate their
children. And there's it's never a
matter of if, it's going to be a matter
of when, if you do lower those vaccine
rates that you're going to see a measles
outbreak." And measles has some among
viruses some like unique not unique but
it's it's highly highly contagious.
Highly contagious. It can stay in a
room. I think it's 2 hours after
floating in the air. Floating in the
air. Yeah. That it's that contagious. So
that I thought was enough to begin a
movie. And so I began this movie in
2019. My first day shooting was at the
CDC's ASIP meetings where they confirm
the next vaccines that are coming out.
And I had Paul Offett there and I had
one of the top antivaxers there, Dell
Bigree, who went on to be a dear friend
of Robert Kenny Jr.'s went on to be
Robert Kenny Jr.'s uh communications
director during his presidential run,
but we'll come back to that. And I also
filmed with uh Andrew Wakefield, a
doctor who had his actually license
taken away when his study was found to
be that it was fraudulent and uh
incorrect and trying to make a
connection between autism and the MMR,
measles, mumps, and rebella vaccine. So
we thought we had a pretty important
movie in all of those elements and then
co happened and it went to another place
where we had to film from lockdown. I
included my family a little bit as like
the all of us and uh for a minute we
thought the anties might god forbid go
away when you have a once in a century
pandemic but they got stronger and more
nefarious.
How does someone judge in your cinematic
world whether or not your film is
propaganda? Great. Vet it, right? Vet
it. Go vet it. Yeah. Look look at the
experts that I have in the film. Look at
the scientific studies that we point out
in the film. We put we put them right up
on the screen and we have them on our
website and all those all. And I will
add the experts you do interview,
they're not saying listen to me because
I alone have this one answer. Correct.
They're representing a scientific
medical establishment. Correct. Right.
And and at some point we have to reclaim
the importance of the word
establishment. Yeah. It's become a bad
word. Are you from the establishment?
That's right. Oh, that's bad. Yeah. No,
there's a reason why an establishment
exists. That Yeah, it's the level of
cynicism is very very depressing. But to
back to your point, your question about
the film, vet the film. Don't take my
word for it. Don't take the fact that I
have the wonderful Neil Degrasse Tyson
as my executive producer, which is a a
great honor and should make them say,
"Hey, if Neil vetted it, that should
mean something." That's fine. But vet
the film and vet the words coming out of
the people we refer to as anti in the
film. It it is true that most propaganda
films don't invite you to vet it. That's
right. But again that goes back to my
I'm trying to wrap it up but but the
tools that we could have on Star Talks
website on Black Valley Films website on
Shot in the Arms website that Black
Valley Films is your production. It's my
production. Thank you. Is that says here
are the tools we use for vetting. Right.
They're right there. here are the tools
we use for vetting and it's transparent.
So it needs to be more and say hey you
trying to poke a hole in me do you have
those tools on your website? Yeah.
Right. So that empowers people to
verify. Yeah. In some way or another. So
Scott, what does your film shot in the
arm have to say about our responsibility
to each other because that's seems to be
deeper than just any conversation about
medicine, right? It's a it's a social
contract contract. Tell me about that.
Yeah. Um, no, it's a great it's a great
point that uh this social contract
became part of the film through um a few
different characters in the film that
reminded me of it. I don't remember the
last time I probably talked about it
outside of making this film. Was it in
grade school or something? So, civics
class. Yeah. A simple definition of the
social contract are these norms that are
written or sometimes not written that
have become norms. Don't drink and
drive. Take out your trash. Be a decent
neighbor. be a good citizen in your
community, don't harm your children,
feed your children, all these different
things. And vaccines could be is part of
that, right? That you don't necessarily
get a vaccine. You do get a vaccine to
keep yourself safe, but sometimes you
don't get a vaccine necessarily for you
to stay safe. You get a vaccine so you
don't pass something on to somebody
who's more vulnerable than you. And
sadly during CO we saw it was building
up long before CO but during CO we
really saw kind of a bit of a disaster
around our social contract that people
leaned into what they would call freedom
but it's really a version of
selfishness. I'm sorry to say it's a
tough word but wait so you explored in
the film that the original sort of
antivaxers was a community deeply
embedded in liberal voting factions. Y
and only under co was there a right
leaning faction that were not so much
anti-farma which is the common battlecry
in the left but they were just pro-
freedom right and so their notion was
you can't inject me if I don't want you
to. That's right. So why don't we just
still allow that but then deny them
access to places where they could spread
the disease or we could give them their
own
island. It's hor it's terribly cynical
and maybe even mean. But if we had an
island, all these people say, "I want my
freedoms. Don't tell me what drugs to
take. Don't touch my food. Um I don't
want my milk to be pasteurized. I don't
want fluoride in my water." Okay, fine.
Here's the island. You guys go start
over again. I think somebody may have
written a book that may have touched on
this but not everything in that list is
equal course. So for example if your
water supply your personal water supply
you remove the fluoride right no one
else is affected by that. True. But if
you are not vaccinated and you catch the
disease and you infect others then they
are affected. Correct. Okay. So not all
the reasons why you might ship people to
this island are equivalent. No, I just
want to ship the ones I don't like. I'm
not I didn't say that this was I didn't
say this was a kind decision, Neil. This
is a frustrated This is a decision.
Okay. So, there's been a failure on the
civics front and that's what you're
really getting at and individual
individual front that we did. We did we
remember that there's a thing called the
social contract. Do we want No, I never
learned it about it that way. But in
fifth grade, I did have civics class. I
don't think I even had civics class.
Yeah, I had a civics club. I had a
button called you were in the civics
club. Nice. And I might still have that
button actually. And we did things like
we held elections and campaigning.
People be ran for president of the class
and things that were microcosms of the
larger society. Yeah. We didn't pretend
someone had been vaccinated or had a
disease, but but it forced you to think
about other people. That's it. And maybe
that was undervalued in the kindergarten
through 12 curriculum. It might be
another one of those things that we took
for granted in a bad way that we took
for granted that we have these systems
and maybe our kinder people in our
family were making those systems work.
If it was our grandparents who were
teaching us to be polite or whatever the
different things were, right? So, how do
we fix it? Again, this is the not
quickly. Let's start there. Not quickly.
Um, the quick part would be to say, is
there a problem? I might make a
comparison to
uh alcohol and and addiction, right? We
may we probably all have some family
member that has been addicted to
something like alcohol or a drug and we
wanted to help them and we might want to
say stop. It's not going to work. What's
the first step that's going to get them
to actually go down the road admitting
their addiction? So I think we're living
through a time where people are not in
the place to admit that they might have
a problem about being cynical about
science. They might have a problem about
humility. They might have a problem with
their relationship to the social
contract. And we have to admit that
problem. Yeah. If you're an alcoholic,
you might go into therapy. Do you go
into therapy if you're not admitting
that science matters in your life? But
you usually don't you usually don't go
to therapy unless you've until you've
admitted it. You don't go to dry out.
You don't Yeah. You you you might have
an intervention, but besides the
intervention, it's you the first step
has to be and it's still even within
intervention. They can leave the uh the
drug rehab place, right? They have to
admit that they have a problem. So, can
we as a society admit that we have a
problem about cynicism, that we have a
problem about selfishness, that we have
a problem about what is expertise and
who we should be listening to? That I
think is Yeah. But you're the filmmaker
and there's nothing more influential in
American society than a well-made film
that everyone sees and is deeply uh
affecting them. Did you just take us in
a time machine prior to social media?
Yeah,
I would agree with that statement except
for and I love films. They've been in
you know after the movie Ghost with you
know Whoopy Goldberg and and Demi Moore
and Demi Moore. Yeah. After that film
polls on people's belief in ghost went
up. There you go. Just because of the
film. Yeah. that they somehow made it
more real because it was a story well
told without question. And so so I'm
just a scientist and you're the
storyteller. You're you're the
timehonored storyteller. Yeah. Whose
craft predates science. Nice. Nice.
Beautiful. The storytelling predates
science. Yes. And I am an independent
documentary filmmaker. So that's
documentary filmmaker and independent
means that I'm a little bit on the
outside.
What do you do if someone notices in
your funding stream that you get money
from like the enemy? You get money from
pharma and you're trying to say that
farmer is good. Sure. I do everything in
my power to not take money from a
conflict of interest in the making of
the film in the distribution of the
film. I don't care who gives me money
because I I finish the film and it's
locked and it's hasn't it hasn't been
influenced. So yeah, but that's another
just because there is a possible
conflict of interest doesn't mean there
is a conflict of interest. There is
people have come to assume it. That's
right. So Scott, we previously
collaborated on a film food evolution,
which explored misinformation regarding
genetically modified organisms, GMOs.
And in both of these films, you're
exploring things that in the
left-leaning community
Some of them are hold sacred and you are
dismantling some of their beliefs within
this. And you had a phrase and I never
remember it exactly. What was it? The
limitation of well-intentioned liberals.
The limitations of well-intentioned
liberals. Yeah. Where it's an idea that
wants to be they want to promote then
they overstep. That's right. In what
they think is true regarding the idea.
That's right. And but they think they're
right. Yeah. But confirmation bias
rabbit hole. Okay. Yeah. And so this has
been your this is your thing. It's a
piece of the pie. It was different prior
to COVID because now then everything
blew up and and there was all sorts of
people with their limitations of of of
good intentions. But yes, I as a born
and raised diehard liberal, I came to
question my liberal brothers and sisters
through that through that lens that it
isn't just good intentions are not
enough. You've got to have data. You
have to have evidence. You have to have
repeatability. You have to check
yourself every so often. So, yes, it's a
Yeah, my point was that often the
liberal left will declare that the
conservative right is anti-science,
right? And and they'll cite very obvious
examples such as denial of climate
change and in some cases denial of
evolution. But the the statement is made
as though they're up on high looking
down looking down. Whereas you part the
curtains in the liberal community, you
get things like homeopathic medicines,
you get crystal healing, feather energy,
you get these things. The only way you
can embrace these ideas and philosophies
is to reject
[Music]
the science that either comes from part
or all of mainstream science that denies
it. That's right. And so that puts you
in a weird place as a storyteller. You
did a beautiful thing on the poster for
food evolution and you signed it saying
to Scott who's not afraid of what is
true. Did I say that? Yeah. Okay. I may
have forged it. Yeah. And I thought it
was such a It took me a little while
actually, Neil, to come back to it and
go, "Oh, that's what that means." Cuz
I'm not afraid of what is true, right?
I'm afraid of what's been manipulated.
Yeah. There's a group think thing that
you don't even know you're in a group
think or somebody lying to me, right? I
Somebody tells me the truth, I'm going
to deal with the truth, right? Somebody
tells me something that's Can you handle
the truth? That's right. Somebody tell
me tells me something that's scary and
it's not true. Oh my god, it's a
disaster, right? Let the the truth is
complicated enough, but I to go to get
back to like why I joked earlier about
could we have a beeper on our phone that
says full of [__] full of [__] full of
[__] right? You know, to any of us,
again, not political. It's a bias alert.
It's a bias alert. Wouldn't that be
fantastic? Or god forbid we seize like
an engine and I can't talk anymore. M
I'm so full of [__] my body stops
functioning. Not me anyone. When you say
seize like an engine, you're referring
to internal combustion engine. Thank you
very much. Electric engines. No seas.
Are there electric engines out there?
Just kidding. Yes. Thank you. I was
going old school. All right. So, thanks
Scott for doing this little bit of
conversation exposing you to our loyal
audiences. Love this audience. And we're
all here to try to make a better world
using science as the tool. And now we
have to include storytellers as part of
that tool. I really appreciate it. All
right, this has been Star Talk special
edition. I want to thank Dr. Knock and
Scott Hamilton Kennedy for coming in for
this recording. Neil deGrasse Tyson here
as always bidding you to keep looking
up.
[Music]